README.md, before:

# Flight Delay Prediction and Analysis

## Overview

This project represents ML analysis of airline delays using the U.S. Department of Transportation's Airline On-Time Statistics and Delay Causes dataset. The project core idea is to predict high-delay periods (months with >25% delay rate) and provides insights for airline operations.

**Student ID:** 16395

## Dataset

The dataset contains **409,612 flight records** from 2003 to 2025, covering domestic flights operated by major U.S. carriers. The dataset includes:

- **Flight Operations**: Total arrivals, cancellations, diversions
- **Delay Causes**: Air Carrier, Weather, National Aviation System, Late Aircraft, Security delays
- **Temporal Information**: Year and month
- **Location Data**: Carrier codes, carrier names, airport codes, airport names
- **Delay Metrics**: Count and duration of delays by cause

## Project Objectives

1. **Predictive Modeling**: Classify months with high delay rates (>25%) vs. normal operations
2. **Data Exploration**: Identify patterns and factors contributing to flight delays
3. **Model Comparison**: Evaluate multiple machine learning algorithms
4. **Feature Engineering**: Create meaningful predictors from raw data
5. **Deployment**: Interactive Streamlit application for exploration and prediction

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11 or higher #3.11.11 version were used while developing
- pip package manager

### Setup Steps

1. **Clone or download the project**

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended)**
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```

3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Ensure dataset is in place**
   - The dataset file `Airline_Delay_Cause.csv` should be in the `data/` directory

## Usage

### Running the Jupyter Notebook

1. **Start Jupyter Notebook**
   ```bash
   jupyter notebook
   ```

2. **Open the notebook**
   - Navigate to `flight_delay_analysis.ipynb`
   - Run cells sequentially to reproduce the analysis

3. **Notebook Sections**:
   - **Data Loading**: Load and inspect the dataset
   - **Exploratory Data Analysis**: Statistical summaries, visualizations, correlation analysis
   - **Data Preparation**: Missing value handling, scaling, feature engineering, train/test split
   - **Model Training**: Training of 5 models (Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Decision Tree, KNN, XGBoost)
   - **Hyperparameter Tuning**: GridSearchCV for Random Forest and XGBoost (best models)
   - **Model Evaluation**: Performance metrics and visualizations

### Running the Streamlit Application

1. **Start the Streamlit app**
   ```bash
   streamlit run src/app.py
   ```

2. **Access the application**
   - The app will open in your default web browser
   - Default URL: `http://localhost:8501`

3. **Application Pages**:
   - **Overview**: Project summary and best model performance
   - **Data Exploration**: Interactive visualizations of delay patterns, carrier performance, and correlations
   - **Model Prediction**: Input form to predict delay risk for specific month-carrier-airport combinations

## Project Sections

### A. Data Loading
- Single dataset source: `Airline_Delay_Cause.csv`
- Dataset shape: 409,612 rows × 21 columns
- Initial data inspection and basic statistics

### B. Exploratory Data Analysis
- **Statistical Summaries**: 
  - Numerical columns: mean, std, min, max, quartiles
  - Categorical columns: unique values, frequency counts
- **Correlation Matrix**: Heatmap showing relationships between numerical features
- **Visualizations**:
  - Histogram: Arrival delay distribution
  - Box plots: Delay distribution by carrier
  - Bar charts: Average delay by month, delay causes, cancellation/diversion rates

### C. Data Preparation
- **Missing Values**: 
  - Delay columns filled with 0 (no delays)
  - Count columns filled with 0
  - Categorical columns filled with 'Unknown'
- **Error Correction**:
  - Negative flight counts corrected
  - Impossible values (delayed flights > total flights) fixed
  - Outlier handling using IQR method
- **Feature Engineering**:
  - Target variable: `high_delay_month` (1 if delay rate > 25%, 0 otherwise)
  - Time-based features: quarter, is_winter, is_summer, is_peak_travel
  - Operational features: flights_per_day, cancellation_rate, total_disruptions
  - Aggregated features: airport and carrier statistics (total flights, cancellations, diversions)
- **Data Splitting**: 
  - Train set: 80% (327,689 samples)
  - Test set: 20% (81,923 samples)
  - Stratified split to maintain class distribution

### D. Model Training
- **Baseline Models**:
  1. Logistic Regression
  2. Random Forest
  3. Decision Tree
  4. K-Nearest Neighbors
  5. XGBoost
- **Hyperparameter Tuning**:
  - Random Forest: GridSearchCV with parameters for n_estimators, max_depth, min_samples_split
  - XGBoost: GridSearchCV with parameters for n_estimators, max_depth, learning_rate, subsample, colsample_bytree
- **Training Method**: Cross-validation used for model selection

### E. Model Evaluation
- **Evaluation Metrics**:
  - Accuracy
  - F1-Score
  - Precision
  - Recall
  - ROC-AUC
- **Test Set Results**:
  - All models evaluated on held-out test set
  - Best model: XGBoost (F1: 0.667, Accuracy: 79.3%, ROC-AUC: 0.873, Precision: 0.592, Recall: 0.765)
- **Visualizations**:
  - Model comparison charts (Accuracy, F1-Score, Recall, Precision, ROC-AUC, Training Time)
  - ROC curves for all models
  - Confusion matrix for best model
  - Classification report

### F. Deployment
- **Streamlit Application**: Multi-page web application
  - **Overview Page**: Project description and best model metrics
  - **Data Exploration Page**: 
    - Dataset overview metrics
    - Delay distribution charts
    - Monthly trends
    - Carrier performance analysis
    - Delay causes visualization
    - Correlation heatmap
  - **Model Prediction Page**:
    - Input form for year, month, carrier, airport, and operational forecasts
    - Real-time prediction with confidence scores
    - Historical context visualization

## Notes

- The trained models are saved in the `models/` directory
- The notebook should be run from the project root directory to ensure correct file paths
- The Streamlit app requires the dataset and model files to be in their respective directories
- All preprocessing steps are saved in `pipeline_data.pkl` for consistent predictions in the Streamlit app

---

*This project was done as part of a ML module coursework and does not represent any actual service.*

Commit message:

Update flight delay analysis notebook with reset execution counts, replace specific output values with placeholders for clarity, and enhance README with installation instructions for OpenMP runtime on macOS. Update model files for consistency.

README.md, after:

# Flight Delay Prediction and Analysis

## Overview

This project represents ML analysis of airline delays using the U.S. Department of Transportation's Airline On-Time Statistics and Delay Causes dataset. The project core idea is to predict high-delay periods (months with >25% delay rate) and provides insights for airline operations.

**Student ID:** 16395

## Dataset

The dataset contains **409,612 flight records** from 2003 to 2025, covering domestic flights operated by major U.S. carriers. The dataset includes:

- **Flight Operations**: Total arrivals, cancellations, diversions
- **Delay Causes**: Air Carrier, Weather, National Aviation System, Late Aircraft, Security delays
- **Temporal Information**: Year and month
- **Location Data**: Carrier codes, carrier names, airport codes, airport names
- **Delay Metrics**: Count and duration of delays by cause

## Project Objectives

1. **Predictive Modeling**: Classify months with high delay rates (>25%) vs. normal operations
2. **Data Exploration**: Identify patterns and factors contributing to flight delays
3. **Model Comparison**: Evaluate multiple machine learning algorithms
4. **Feature Engineering**: Create meaningful predictors from raw data
5. **Deployment**: Interactive Streamlit application for exploration and prediction

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11 or higher #3.11.11 version were used while developing
- pip package manager

### Setup Steps

1. **Clone or download the project**

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended)**
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```

3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Ensure dataset is in place**
   - The dataset file `Airline_Delay_Cause.csv` should be in the `data/` directory

## Usage

### Running the Jupyter Notebook

1. **Start Jupyter Notebook**
   ```bash
   jupyter notebook
   ```

2. **Open the notebook**
   - Navigate to `flight_delay_analysis_16395.ipynb`
   - Run cells sequentially to reproduce the analysis

   **Note**: If you encounter an XGBoost error on macOS like:
   ```
   XGBoostError: XGBoost Library (libxgboost.dylib) could not be loaded.
   Likely causes:
     * OpenMP runtime is not installed
       - vcomp140.dll or libgomp-1.dll for Windows
       - libomp.dylib for Mac OSX
       - libgomp.so for Linux and other UNIX-like OSes
     Mac OSX users: Run brew install libomp to install OpenMP runtime.
     * You are running 32-bit Python on a 64-bit OS
   ```
   
   Install the OpenMP runtime using Homebrew:
   ```bash
   brew install libomp
   ```
   
   Then reinstall XGBoost:
   ```bash
   source venv/bin/activate
   pip uninstall xgboost
   pip install xgboost
   ```


3. **Notebook Sections**:
   - **Data Loading**: Load and inspect the dataset
   - **Exploratory Data Analysis**: Statistical summaries, visualizations, correlation analysis
   - **Data Preparation**: Missing value handling, scaling, feature engineering, train/test split
   - **Model Training**: Training of 5 models (Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Decision Tree, KNN, XGBoost)
   - **Hyperparameter Tuning**: GridSearchCV for Random Forest and XGBoost (best models)
   - **Model Evaluation**: Performance metrics and visualizations

### Running the Streamlit Application

1. **Start the Streamlit app**
   ```bash
   streamlit run src/app.py
   ```

2. **Access the application**
   - The app will open in your default web browser
   - Default URL: `http://localhost:8501`

3. **Application Pages**:
   - **Overview**: Project summary and best model performance
   - **Data Exploration**: Interactive visualizations of delay patterns, carrier performance, and correlations
   - **Model Prediction**: Input form to predict delay risk for specific month-carrier-airport combinations

## Project Sections

### A. Data Loading
- Single dataset source: `Airline_Delay_Cause.csv`
- Dataset shape: 409,612 rows × 21 columns
- Initial data inspection and basic statistics

### B. Exploratory Data Analysis
- **Statistical Summaries**: 
  - Numerical columns: mean, std, min, max, quartiles
  - Categorical columns: unique values, frequency counts
- **Correlation Matrix**: Heatmap showing relationships between numerical features
- **Visualizations**:
  - Histogram: Arrival delay distribution
  - Box plots: Delay distribution by carrier
  - Bar charts: Average delay by month, delay causes, cancellation/diversion rates

### C. Data Preparation
- **Missing Values**: 
  - Delay columns filled with 0 (no delays)
  - Count columns filled with 0
  - Categorical columns filled with 'Unknown'
- **Error Correction**:
  - Negative flight counts corrected
  - Impossible values (delayed flights > total flights) fixed
  - Outlier handling using IQR method
- **Feature Engineering**:
  - Target variable: `high_delay_month` (1 if delay rate > 25%, 0 otherwise)
  - Time-based features: quarter, is_winter, is_summer, is_peak_travel
  - Operational features: flights_per_day, cancellation_rate, total_disruptions
  - Aggregated features: airport and carrier statistics (total flights, cancellations, diversions)
- **Data Splitting**: 
  - Train set: 80% (327,689 samples)
  - Test set: 20% (81,923 samples)
  - Stratified split to maintain class distribution

### D. Model Training
- **Baseline Models**:
  1. Logistic Regression
  2. Random Forest
  3. Decision Tree
  4. K-Nearest Neighbors
  5. XGBoost
- **Hyperparameter Tuning**:
  - Random Forest: GridSearchCV with parameters for n_estimators, max_depth, min_samples_split
  - XGBoost: GridSearchCV with parameters for n_estimators, max_depth, learning_rate, subsample, colsample_bytree
- **Training Method**: Cross-validation used for model selection

### E. Model Evaluation
- **Evaluation Metrics**:
  - Accuracy
  - F1-Score
  - Precision
  - Recall
  - ROC-AUC
- **Test Set Results**:
  - All models evaluated on held-out test set
  - Best model: XGBoost (F1: 0.667, Accuracy: 79.3%, ROC-AUC: 0.873, Precision: 0.592, Recall: 0.765)
- **Visualizations**:
  - Model comparison charts (Accuracy, F1-Score, Recall, Precision, ROC-AUC, Training Time)
  - ROC curves for all models
  - Confusion matrix for best model
  - Classification report

### F. Deployment
- **Streamlit Application**: Multi-page web application
  - **Overview Page**: Project description and best model metrics
  - **Data Exploration Page**: 
    - Dataset overview metrics
    - Delay distribution charts
    - Monthly trends
    - Carrier performance analysis
    - Delay causes visualization
    - Correlation heatmap
  - **Model Prediction Page**:
    - Input form for year, month, carrier, airport, and operational forecasts
    - Real-time prediction with confidence scores
    - Historical context visualization

## Notes

- The trained models are saved in the `models/` directory
- The notebook should be run from the project root directory to ensure correct file paths
- The Streamlit app requires the dataset and model files to be in their respective directories
- All preprocessing steps are saved in `pipeline_data.pkl` for consistent predictions in the Streamlit app

---

*This project was done as part of a ML module coursework and does not represent any actual service.*
